docs: Add comprehensive Istio Ambient Mode update and waypoint proxy procedures (#1279)
istio-ecosystem/sail-operator: docs/common/istio-ambient-update.adoc

[[update-the-istio-control-plane]]
==== Update the Istio Control Plane

Update the control plane by changing the version in the Istio resource. The Sail Operator replaces the existing istiod deployment with the new version.

*Prerequisites:*

* You have cluster-admin access to your Kubernetes cluster.
* You have installed the Sail Operator.
* You have deployed Istio in ambient mode with the InPlace update strategy.
* The Istio resource named `default` is deployed in the `istio-system` namespace with the InPlace update strategy.
* You have deployed IstioCNI in the `istio-cni` namespace.
* You have deployed ZTunnel in the `ztunnel` namespace.
* You have verified the current version and the Istio resource is in a Healthy state by running the following command:

[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ kubectl get istio -n istio-system
NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE
default   1           1       1        default           Healthy   v1.26.3   7d

> ----

Reviewer: I think this is not necessary because we are telling to the user before that you need to have deployed the Istio resource.

*Procedure:*

> . Update the Istio resource version. For example, to update to Istio 1.26.4, set the `spec.version` field to `v1.26.4` by running the following command:

Reviewer: Please replace all the hardcoded istio version with the var from the beginning of the document: istio_latest_version, etc. Take this example: https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/sail-operator/blob/2f1ea60286e16aa7c7d1b988d662d53054ed6d38/docs/update-strategy/update-strategy.adoc?plain=1#L109

This replacement need to be done across all the documentation to ensure that we keep always up to date the Istio versions described in the documents

----
+
*Note:* The ZTunnel DaemonSet update may take several minutes as pods are updated node-by-node to minimize disruption.

For detailed information about updating IstioCNI, see link:../../README.md#updating-istiocni[IstioCNI Update Procedure in README]. For ZTunnel update procedures, refer to section "Common Update Procedures for Ambient Components".

[[recommendations-for-inplace-strategy-in-ambient-mode]]
=== Recommendations for InPlace strategy in Ambient Mode

* **High Availability:** Run multiple istiod replicas to reduce disruptions. Brief traffic disruption may still occur. See link:../general/istiod-ha.adoc#running-istiod-in-ha-mode[Istiod HA guide].
* **ZTunnel Updates:** ZTunnel DaemonSet uses RollingUpdate by default, updating one node at a time. Monitor the rollout.
* **Maintenance Window:** Perform upgrades during a maintenance window.
* **Testing:** Test upgrades in non-production first.

'''

[[updating-with-revisionbased-strategy]]
== Updating with RevisionBased Strategy

For general information about the RevisionBased strategy, see link:../update-strategy/update-strategy.adoc#revisionbased[RevisionBased].

> WARNING: **RevisionBased updates have limited support in ambient mode and require manual intervention.** Limitations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: **RevisionBased updates have limited support in ambient mode and require manual intervention.** 

Limitations:
```
This is rendered wrong, is missing an new line

[[migrate-ambient-workloads-to-new-revision]]
==== Migrate Ambient Workloads to New Revision

Unlike sidecar mode, ambient mode workloads don't use namespace labels like `istio.io/rev` for version selection. Instead, ambient workloads automatically connect to the active control plane revision. However, to ensure proper migration:

. Verify that your ambient namespaces are still labeled correctly:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ kubectl get namespace bookinfo --show-labels | grep istio
NAME       STATUS   AGE   LABELS
bookinfo   Active   7d    istio-discovery=enabled,istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
----

. The ambient workloads automatically use the new control plane. Verify connectivity:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----

> $ istioctl ztunnel-config workloads --namespace ztunnel | grep bookinfo

Reviewer: Adding here an example output will be great to show to the user what he should be checking

Author: This file was deleted and its content merged into `docs/update-strategy/update-strategy.adoc` in commit e1664a20 ("docs: merge ambient update content into update-strategy.adoc").

The merged content uses generic placeholders for namespace names. Example output for `istioctl ztunnel-config workloads` is available in `docs/common/istio-ambient-mode.adoc` which users are directed to for ambient mode details.

----

. For more controlled migration, you can temporarily restart application pods to ensure they pick up any configuration changes:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----

> // Removed as pod restarts are generally unnecessary in ambient mode

Author: This file was deleted and its content merged into `docs/update-strategy/update-strategy.adoc` in commit e1664a20 ("docs: merge ambient update content into update-strategy.adoc").

----
$ kubectl get pods -n bookinfo
----

. Verify ZTunnel is processing traffic for your ambient workloads:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ istioctl ztunnel-config workloads --namespace ztunnel | grep bookinfo
----

. Test connectivity within your mesh:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ kubectl exec "$(kubectl get pod -l app=ratings -n bookinfo -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -c ratings -n bookinfo -- curl -sS productpage:9080/productpage | grep -o "<title>.*</title>"
<title>Simple Bookstore App</title>
----

[[updating-waypoint-proxies-if-deployed]]
=== Updating Waypoint Proxies (If Deployed)

If you have deployed waypoint proxies in your ambient mesh for Layer 7 features, they should be verified after the control plane upgrade. For detailed information about waypoint proxies, see link:./istio-ambient-waypoint.adoc#introduction-to-istio-waypoint-proxy[Introduction to Istio Waypoint Proxy].

. List existing waypoint proxies:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ kubectl get gateway -n bookinfo
NAME       CLASS              ADDRESS        PROGRAMMED   AGE
waypoint   istio-waypoint     10.96.123.45   True         7d
----

> . Waypoint proxies should automatically update to use the new control plane. Verify the waypoint proxy pods are running:

Reviewer: Maybe add here a command and example to verify that waypoint is using expected version

=== Impact on Existing Ambient Workloads

During ambient mode upgrades:

When upgrading the ambient cluster, new mTLS connections continue to function normally throughout the upgrade process. However, upgrading ztunnel will cause any existing long-lived TCP connections (including mTLS connections) on the upgraded node to reset after a grace period.

[[discovery-selectors-impact]]
=== Discovery Selectors Impact

If you're using discovery selectors to scope your mesh:

* **Label Verification:** Ensure that all required namespaces (istio-system, istio-cni, ztunnel) retain their discovery selector labels during upgrades.
* **Namespace Discovery:** The control plane must discover all necessary namespaces for proper operation.
* **Verification Command:**

[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ kubectl get namespace -l istio-discovery=enabled
NAME           STATUS   AGE
istio-system   Active   7d
istio-cni      Active   7d
ztunnel        Active   7d
bookinfo       Active   7d
----

[[troubleshooting-common-issues]]
=== Troubleshooting Common Issues

**For common issues:**

* Ztunnel Troubleshoot: https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/usage/troubleshoot-ztunnel/

> * Waypoint Troubleshoot: https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/usage/troubleshoot-ztunnel/

Reviewer: The link should be: https://istio.io/latest/docs/ambient/usage/troubleshoot-waypoint/

// Variables embedded for GitHub compatibility
:istio_latest_version: 1.26.3
:istio_latest_version_revision_format: 1-26-3
:istio_latest_tag: v1.26-latest
:istio_release_name: release-1.26
:istio_latest_minus_one_version: 1.26.2
:istio_latest_minus_one_version_revision_format: 1-26-2

link:../README.adoc[Return to Project Root]

[[updating-istio-in-ambient-mode]]
== Updating Istio in Ambient Mode

This guide provides procedures for updating Istio when deployed in ambient mode using the Sail Operator. The upgrade process includes updating the Istio control plane, IstioCNI, and ZTunnel components.

For general information about update strategies (InPlace and RevisionBased) and versioning, see link:../update-strategy/update-strategy.adoc#update-strategy[Update Strategy].

For information about installing Istio in ambient mode, see link:./istio-ambient-mode.adoc#introduction-to-istio-ambient-mode[Istio Ambient Mode].

*Note:* Istio's ambient mode is available starting from Istio version 1.24.0.

*Key differences in ambient mode:*

* Updates involve three components: Control Plane, IstioCNI, and ZTunnel
* Components must be updated in sequence: Control Plane → IstioCNI → ZTunnel

> * No pod restart needed for workloads (workloads automatically connect to new control plane)

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove this statement as technically workloads do not connect to the control plane, the ztunnel node agent connects to the control plane.

```suggestion
* No pod restart needed for workloads
```

Author: Addressed on 35ec7b84

* **ZTunnel Updates:** The ZTunnel DaemonSet uses a RollingUpdate strategy by default, which updates pods one node at a time. Monitor the rollout to ensure it completes successfully.
* **Maintenance Window:** While ambient mode is designed to minimize disruption, it's recommended to perform upgrades during a maintenance window.
* **Testing:** Always test the upgrade process in a non-production environment first.

'''

[[updating-with-revisionbased-strategy]]
== Updating with RevisionBased Strategy

For general information about the RevisionBased strategy, see link:../update-strategy/update-strategy.adoc#revisionbased[RevisionBased].

WARNING: **RevisionBased updates are not fully supported in ambient mode and require significant manual intervention.** This strategy has the following limitations when used with ambient mode:

* **Single ZTunnel Instance:** Only one ztunnel instance can run in the cluster at any time, which limits the canary upgrade capabilities typically available with RevisionBased updates.

> * **Manual CRD Synchronization:** You must manually synchronize CRDs between Istio control plane revisions and the ZTunnel instance, primarily managing the revision name configuration.

Reviewer 2: When you say, synchronize, are you referring to the values that are part of the ztunnel resource/CR and the Istio resource/CR? Or are you talking about CRD itself? If its the former, please rephrase it.

[[migrate-ambient-workloads-to-new-revision]]
==== Migrate Ambient Workloads to New Revision

Unlike sidecar mode, ambient mode workloads don't use namespace labels like `istio.io/rev` for version selection. Instead, ambient workloads automatically connect to the active control plane revision. However, to ensure proper migration:

. Verify that your ambient namespaces are still labeled correctly:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ kubectl get namespace bookinfo --show-labels | grep istio
NAME       STATUS   AGE   LABELS
bookinfo   Active   7d    istio-discovery=enabled,istio.io/dataplane-mode=ambient
----

. The ambient workloads automatically use the new control plane. Verify connectivity:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ istioctl ztunnel-config workloads --namespace ztunnel | grep bookinfo
----

. For more controlled migration, you can temporarily restart application pods to ensure they pick up any configuration changes:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----

> $ kubectl rollout restart deployment -n <NAMESPACE>

Reviewer 3: directly working in the bookinfo ns.

-n <NAMESPACE> --> bookinfo

kubectl rollout restart deployment -n bookinfo

----

. Wait for the rollout to complete:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ kubectl rollout status deployment -n <NAMESPACE>

> ----

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure why we need this.

* **Verification:** Test L7 features after the upgrade to ensure waypoint proxies are functioning correctly. See link:./istio-ambient-waypoint.adoc#layer-7-features-in-ambient-mode[Layer 7 Features in Ambient Mode] for testing examples.

**Update Behavior by Strategy:**

* **InPlace Strategy:** Waypoint proxies transition directly to the new control plane version
* **RevisionBased Strategy:** Waypoint proxies can function with both control plane revisions during migration. However, note that the single-ztunnel limitation still applies to the ambient data plane.

**Cross-Namespace Waypoints:**

Verify labels remain in place for cross-namespace waypoint usage:

[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ kubectl get ns bookinfo --show-labels | grep waypoint
bookinfo  Active  istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace=foo,istio.io/use-waypoint=waypoint-foo
----

For detailed waypoint update procedures, see link:./istio-ambient-waypoint.adoc#updating-waypoint-proxies[Updating Waypoint Proxies].

[[impact-on-existing-ambient-workloads]]
=== Impact on Existing Ambient Workloads

During ambient mode upgrades:

> When upgrading the ambient cluster, new mTLS connections continue to function normally throughout the upgrade process. However, upgrading ztunnel will cause any existing long-lived TCP connections (including mTLS connections) on the upgraded node to reset after a grace period. To minimize disruption during production upgrades, node cordoning, blue/green node pools are recommended.

Reviewer 2: As discussed on slack, lets remove the following statement until we find a proper solution.

```suggestion
When upgrading the ambient cluster, new mTLS connections continue to function normally throughout the upgrade process. However, upgrading ztunnel will cause any existing long-lived TCP connections (including mTLS connections) on the upgraded node to reset after a grace period. 
```

<title>Simple Bookstore App</title>
----

[[verify-old-revision-cleanup]]
==== Verify Old Revision Cleanup

. After the grace period (specified in `inactiveRevisionDeletionGracePeriodSeconds`), verify that the old revision has been cleaned up:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ kubectl get istiorevision -n istio-system
NAME              TYPE    READY   STATUS    IN USE   VERSION   AGE
default-v1-26-4   Local   True    Healthy   True     v1.26.4   35m
----

. Confirm only the new control plane pods are running:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ kubectl get pods -n istio-system -l app=istiod
NAME                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
istiod-default-v1-26-4-7c8e9d775c-y8l3n   1/1     Running   0          35m
----

. Verify the Istio resource reflects the single active revision:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ kubectl get istio -n istio-system
NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION     STATUS    VERSION   AGE
default   1           1       1        default-v1-26-4     Healthy   v1.26.4   7d1h
----

> If you have deployed waypoint proxies, verify them after the upgrade. Refer to section "Updating Waypoint Proxies (If Deployed)" for detailed instructions.

Author: Ops, fixed under 8360f075

+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ kubectl get istiorevision -n istio-system
NAME              TYPE    READY   STATUS    IN USE   VERSION   AGE
default-v1-26-3   Local   True    Healthy   True     v1.26.3   7d
default-v1-26-4   Local   True    Healthy   False    v1.26.4   2m
----
+
The old revision shows `IN USE: True` because workloads are still connected to it. The new revision shows `IN USE: False` until workloads are migrated.

. Confirm both control plane pods are running:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ kubectl get pods -n istio-system -l app=istiod
NAME                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
istiod-default-v1-26-3-6bd6b8664b-x7k2m   1/1     Running   0          7d
istiod-default-v1-26-4-7c8e9d775c-y8l3n   1/1     Running   0          2m
----

. Verify the new control plane is functioning by checking its logs:
+
[source,bash,subs="attributes+",name="ambient-revision-based-strategy"]
----
$ kubectl logs -n istio-system istiod-default-v1-26-4-7c8e9d775c-y8l3n --tail=50 | grep -i "version\|ready"
----

> After creating the new Istio control plane revision, proceed to update IstioCNI and ZTunnel. Refer to section "Common Update Procedures for Ambient Components" for detailed instructions. Note that IstioCNI and ZTunnel are compatible with multiple control plane versions and will continue to handle traffic for both the old and new control planes during the migration period.

Reviewer 2: > ZTunnel are compatible with multiple control plane versions and will continue to handle traffic for both the old and new control planes during the migration period.

This is not true for ztunnel.

In ambient mode, the upgrade process involves three main components:

* **Istio Control Plane** - Manages configuration and certificate distribution
* **IstioCNI** - Handles traffic redirection configuration
* **ZTunnel** - Per-node L4 proxy running as a DaemonSet

The Istio resource configuration includes the following fields that are relevant to the upgrade process:

**spec.version**::
Specifies the version of Istio to install. Use the format vX.Y.Z, where X.Y.Z is the desired Istio release. For example, set the field to v1.24.4 to install Istio 1.24.4. Alternatively, set the value to an alias such as vX.Y-latest to automatically install the latest supported patch version for the specified minor release.

**spec.updateStrategy**::
Defines the strategy for updating the Istio control plane. The available update strategies are InPlace and RevisionBased.

*Note:* To enable automatic patch upgrades, set the approval strategy of the Operator to Automatic. When the Operator detects a new patch release and the version field uses the vX.Y-latest alias, the control plane is updated based on the configured updateStrategy type.

[[about-istio-control-plane-update-strategies]]

> === About Istio control plane update strategies

Reviewer 2: This is duplicating the content from Update Strategy doc. If you think something is missing, please add it over there.

The Sail Operator supports two update strategies: InPlace and RevisionBased. For detailed information about these strategies and their general behavior, see link:../update-strategy/update-strategy.adoc#update-strategy[Update Strategy].

In ambient mode, both strategies require additional steps to update IstioCNI and ZTunnel components after the control plane upgrade. The key difference is that:

* **InPlace** updates all components directly, with workloads immediately connecting to the new control plane
* **RevisionBased** allows for gradual migration, with IstioCNI and ZTunnel supporting multiple control plane versions during the transition

'''

[[about-inplace-strategy]]
== About InPlace strategy

The InPlace update strategy runs only one revision of the control plane at a time. During an update, all the workloads immediately connect to the new control plane version. To maintain compatibility between the ambient data plane components and the control plane, you can upgrade only one minor version at a time.

For general information about the InPlace strategy, see the link:../update-strategy/update-strategy.adoc#inplace[InPlace] section in the Update Strategy documentation.

> For ambient mode, the IstioCNI and ZTunnel components are also updated using rolling updates. While the InPlace strategy offers simplicity and efficiency, there's a slight possibility of application traffic interruption if a workload pod updates, restarts, or scales while the control plane is restarting. You can mitigate this risk by running multiple replicas of the Istio control plane (istiod).

Author: Fixed under 1712c7d6

*Prerequisites:*

* You have cluster-admin access to your Kubernetes cluster.
* You have installed the Sail Operator.
* You have deployed Istio in ambient mode with the InPlace update strategy.
* The Istio resource named `default` is deployed in the `istio-system` namespace with the InPlace update strategy.
* You have verified the current version and the Istio resource is in a Healthy state by running the following command:

[source,bash]
----
$ kubectl get istio -n istio-system
NAME      REVISIONS   READY   IN USE   ACTIVE REVISION   STATUS    VERSION   AGE
default   1           1       1        default           Healthy   v1.26.3   7d
----

*Procedure:*

. Update the Istio resource version. For example, to update to Istio 1.26.4, set the `spec.version` field to `v1.26.4` by running the following command:
+
[source,bash]
----

> $ kubectl patch istio default -n istio-system --type='merge' -p '{"spec":{"version":"v1.26.4"}}'

Reviewer 2: As @fjglira mentioned please check if we can use `istio_latest_version` instead of hardcoded version.

[source,bash]
----
$ kubectl logs -n istio-system -l app=istiod --tail=50 | grep -i "version\|ready"
----

After updating the Istio control plane, proceed to update IstioCNI, ZTunnel, verify ambient workloads, and optionally update Waypoint Proxies. Refer to section "Common Update Procedures for Ambient Components" for detailed instructions on updating these components.

[[recommendations-for-inplace-strategy-in-ambient-mode]]
=== Recommendations for InPlace strategy in Ambient Mode

* **High Availability:** Configure the istiod deployment with multiple replicas for high availability during updates. See the link:../general/istiod-ha.adoc#running-istiod-in-ha-mode[Istiod HA guide] for more information.
* **ZTunnel Updates:** The ZTunnel DaemonSet uses a RollingUpdate strategy by default, which updates pods one node at a time. Monitor the rollout to ensure it completes successfully.
* **Maintenance Window:** While ambient mode is designed to minimize disruption, it's recommended to perform upgrades during a maintenance window.
* **Testing:** Always test the upgrade process in a non-production environment first.

'''

[[about-revisionbased-strategy]]
== About RevisionBased strategy

> The RevisionBased strategy runs two revisions of the control plane during an upgrade. This approach supports gradual workload migration from the old control plane to the new one, enabling canary upgrades. It also supports upgrades across more than one minor version.

Reviewer 2: > It also supports upgrades across more than one minor version.

This is not guaranteed to work in Ambient as "The ztunnel at version 1.x is compatible with the control plane at version 1.x+1 and 1.x. This means the control plane must be upgraded before ztunnel, as long as their version difference is within one minor version. "

I feel we can remove the RevisionBased upgrades for now.
CC: @dgn @fjglira

=== Updating Waypoint Proxies (If Deployed)

If you have deployed waypoint proxies in your ambient mesh for Layer 7 features, they should be verified after the control plane upgrade. For detailed information about waypoint proxies, see link:./istio-ambient-waypoint.adoc#introduction-to-istio-waypoint-proxy[Introduction to Istio Waypoint Proxy].

. List existing waypoint proxies:
+
[source,bash]
----
$ kubectl get gateway -n bookinfo
NAME       CLASS              ADDRESS        PROGRAMMED   AGE
waypoint   istio-waypoint     10.96.123.45   True         7d
----

. Waypoint proxies should automatically update to use the new control plane. Verify the waypoint proxy pods are running:
+
[source,bash]
----
$ kubectl get pods -n bookinfo -l gateway.networking.k8s.io/gateway-name=waypoint
NAME                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
waypoint-5d9c8b7f9-abc12   1/1     Running   0          5m
----

. Verify L7 features are working correctly by testing traffic routing and authorization policies. See link:./istio-ambient-waypoint.adoc#layer-7-features-in-ambient-mode[Layer 7 Features in Ambient Mode] for examples.

'''

[[about-the-istio-cni-update-process]]

> == About the Istio CNI update process

Author: Fixed under: 3f3e3762

In ambient mode, the IstioCNI component is responsible for traffic redirection. The component is compatible with multiple control plane versions during RevisionBased upgrades and continues to handle traffic redirection for both old and new control planes during the migration period.

For detailed procedures on updating IstioCNI, see section "Updating IstioCNI".

'''

[[special-considerations-for-ambient-mode-upgrades]]
== Special Considerations for Ambient Mode Upgrades

[[ztunnel-daemonset-updates]]
=== ZTunnel DaemonSet Updates

The ZTunnel component runs as a DaemonSet on every node in the cluster. During upgrades:

* **Rolling Updates:** ZTunnel uses a RollingUpdate strategy, updating one node at a time by default.
* **Minimal Disruption:** While a node's ZTunnel pod is restarting, new connections may experience brief latency, but existing connections are maintained.
* **Node-by-Node:** The update process ensures that at least one ZTunnel pod is always available on each node before proceeding to the next.
* **Monitoring:** Monitor the ZTunnel DaemonSet rollout status:

[source,bash]
----
$ kubectl rollout status daemonset/ztunnel -n ztunnel
----

> 

Author: Removed.

[[istiocni-considerations]]
=== IstioCNI Considerations

The IstioCNI component is responsible for traffic redirection in ambient mode:

* **Version Compatibility:** IstioCNI must be compatible with the ZTunnel version. Always upgrade IstioCNI before or alongside ZTunnel.
* **DaemonSet Updates:** Like ZTunnel, IstioCNI runs as a DaemonSet and uses rolling updates.
* **Traffic Redirection:** During the update, existing traffic redirection rules remain in place until the new version is applied.
* **Verification:** After updating, verify IstioCNI pods are running on all nodes:

[source,bash]
----
$ kubectl get pods -n istio-cni -o wide
----

[[control-plane-and-data-plane-version-skew]]
=== Control Plane and Data Plane Version Skew

In ambient mode, version skew between components is handled differently than in sidecar mode:

> * **Supported Skew:** The control plane (Istio) can typically be N+1 or N-1 relative to the data plane (ZTunnel).

Author: Changed.

* **Testing Required:** Always test your specific version combinations in a non-production environment.
* **Recommendation:** Keep all components (Istio, IstioCNI, ZTunnel) at the same version when possible.

[[waypoint-proxy-compatibility]]
=== Waypoint Proxy Compatibility

If you have deployed waypoint proxies for L7 features:

* **Automatic Updates:** Waypoint proxies automatically reference the active control plane revision.

> * **Gateway API:** Waypoint proxies are deployed using Kubernetes Gateway resources and will continue to function during upgrades.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Gateway API:** Waypoint proxies are deployed using Kubernetes Gateway resources and are managed automatically by Istiod.
```

> * **Recreation:** In rare cases, you may need to recreate waypoint Gateway resources if there are breaking changes between versions.

Reviewer 2: Can you please share any reference for this statement.

Reviewer 2: I think we can remove the "Recreation:" step.

Author: Removed under dbb70f5d

**Update Behavior by Strategy:**

* **InPlace Strategy:** Waypoint proxies transition directly to the new control plane version
* **RevisionBased Strategy:** Waypoint proxies function with both revisions during migration

**L7 Feature Verification:**

After upgrade, verify L7 features work correctly:

[source,bash]
----
$ kubectl get authorizationpolicies -n bookinfo
$ kubectl get httproutes -n bookinfo
----

**Cross-Namespace Waypoints:**

Verify labels remain in place for cross-namespace waypoint usage:

[source,bash]
----
$ kubectl get ns bookinfo --show-labels | grep waypoint
bookinfo  Active  istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace=foo,istio.io/use-waypoint=waypoint-foo
----

For detailed waypoint update procedures, see link:./istio-ambient-waypoint.adoc#updating-waypoint-proxies[Updating Waypoint Proxies].

[[impact-on-existing-ambient-workloads]]
=== Impact on Existing Ambient Workloads

During ambient mode upgrades:

* **No Pod Restarts Required:** Unlike sidecar mode, ambient workloads don't require pod restarts to pick up the new mesh version.

> * **Automatic Reconnection:** Workloads automatically reconnect to the upgraded control plane.

Reviewer 2: Please remove this statement.

```suggestion

```

> * **mTLS Continuity:** Mutual TLS connections are maintained throughout the upgrade process.

Author: Done.
